.\" aprs-weather-submit version 1.5
.\" Copyright (c) 2019-2022 Colin Cogle
.\"
.\" This file, aprs-weather-submit.1, is part of aprs-weather-submit.
.\" 
.\" aprs-weather-submit is free software: you can redistribute it and/or
.\" modify it under the terms of the GNU General Public License as published
.\" by the Free Software Foundation, either version 3 of the License, or
.\" (at your option) any later version.
.\"
.\" aprs-weather-submit is distributed in the hope that it will be useful,
.\" but WITHOUT ANY WARRANTY; without even the implied warranty of
.\" MERCHANTABILITY or FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.  See the
.\" GNU General Public License for more details.
.\"
.\" You should have received a copy of the GNU General Public License
.\" along with aprs-weather-submit. If not, see <https://www.gnu.org/licenses/>.
.\"
.\" (This page is best viewed with the command: groff -man)
.\"
.TH aprs\-weather\-submit 1 "aprs-weather-submit" "Unreleased" "Version 1.5"
.SH NAME
aprs\-weather\-submit \- manually submit weather station data to the APRS-IS network
.SH DESCRIPTION
Not everyone has a fancy weather station with APRS connectivity built in.
Maybe all you have is a thermometer and a rain gauge.
This command-line app will manually submit APRS 1.2.1-compliant weather information to the APRS-IS network.
.SH SYNOPSIS
.PP
.BR aprs\-weather\-submit " [" " \-H " | " \-v " ]
.PP
.BI "aprs\-weather\-submit \-k " CALLSIGN[-SSID] " \-n " LATITUDE " \-e " LONGITUDE
.RB " [" " \-q " "]"
[
.BI "\-I " SERVER_NAME " \-o " PORT_NUMBER " \-u " USERNAME " \-d " PASSWORD
]
.RB [ " \-A "
.IR FEET " ]\:"
.RB [ " \-b "
.IR MILLIBARS_OR_HECTOPASCALS " ]\:"
.RB [ " \-c "
.IR DEGREES " ]\:"
.RB [ " \-F "
.IR FEET " ]\:"
.RB [ " \-g "
.IR SPEED " ]\:"
.RB [ " \-h "
.IR PERCENTAGE " ]\:"
.RB [ " \-L "
.IR WATTS_PER_SQUARE_METER " ]\:"
.RB [ " \-p "
.IR INCHES " ]\:"
.RB [ " \-P "
.IR INCHES " ]\:"
.RB [ " \-r "
.IR INCHES " ]\:"
.RB [ " \-s "
.IR INCHES " ]\:"
.RB [ " \-S "
.IR SPEED " ]\:"
.RB [ " \-t "
.IR DEGREES_F " | " 
.B "\-T "
.IR DEGREES_C " ]\:"
.RB [ " \-v "
.IR VOLTS " ]\:"
.RB [ " \-X "
.IR NANOSIEVERTS " ]\:"

.SH OPTIONS
aprs-weather-submit is not interactive;
please specify all of your input as command-line options.
The equal signs ("=") are not required and are only shown for clarity.

.SS SPECIAL OPTIONS
.TP
.BR \-H ", " \-\-help
Show long help and exit.
.TP
.BR \-v ", " \-\-version
Show version information and exit.
.TP
.BR \-C ", " \-\-compressed\-position
Report using compressed position data.
By default, aprs\-weather\-submit will send packets with the position in uncompressed format.
This option will compress the latitude, longitude, wind direction, and wind speed information.
It is recommended to use compressed positions;  however, it is not the default option because the popular website https://APRS.fi does not support compressed positions in weather packets.
.TP
.BR \-Q ", " \-\-no\-comment
Do not include the APRS software type character ('X') nor the app's name and version in the comment field of the APRS packet.

.SS CALLSIGN AND LOCATION OPTIONS
The APRS specification requires all packets to have a callsign, and strongly encourages all weather reports to have position information.
(See the BUGS AND ERRATA section.)
.TP
.BR \-k ", " \-\-callsign =\fICALLSIGN[-SSID]\fP
Required parameter.
Enter your amateur radio callsign (with or without an SSID), or your Citizens Weather Observer Program identifier.
.TP
.BR \-n ", " \-\-latitude =\fILATITUDE\fP
Required parameter.
Enter your weather station's current latitude, in decimal degrees north of the Equator.
For locations in the Southern Hemisphere, make the number negative.
.TP
.BR \-e ", " \-\-longitude =\fILONGITUDE\fP
Required parameter.
Enter your weather station's current longitude, in decimal degrees east of the Prime Meridian.
For locations in the Western Hemisphere, make the number negative.
.TP
.BR \-A ", " \-\-altitude =\fIFEET\fP
Optional parameter.
The altitude of your weather station, expressed in feet about the mean sea level.
You may report values up to 999,999 feet, with a one-foot resolution.

.SS REQUIRED APRS-IS OPTIONS
If you do not specify \fIall\fP of the following options to connect to and authenticate with an IGate, then the APRS packet will only be printed to stdout.
.TP
.BR \-I ", " \-\-server =\fISERVER_NAME\fP
The IGate to which to send this packet.
You can specify the server name or a literal IPv4 or IPv6 address.
.TP
.BR \-o ", " \-\-port =\fIPORT_NUMBER\fP
The port on the IGate server that is accepting incoming connections.
.TP
.BR \-u ", " \-\-username =\fIUSERNAME\fP
Authenticate to the server with this username.
.TP
.BR \-d ", " \-\-password =\fIPASSWORD\fP
Authenticate to the server with this password.
Note that this will be sent in cleartext!
(See the BUGS AND ERRATA section.)

.SS WEATHER OPTIONS
You may add zero or more weather measurements to your report.
All minimum and maximum measurements listed below are inclusive unless otherwise specified.
All options accept measurements in whole numbers only, unless otherwise specified.
.TP
.BR \-b ", " \-\-pressure =\fIMILLIBARS_OR_HECTOPASCALS\fP
The current barometric pressure.
You may report values up to 9999.9 millibars or hectopascals, with a resolution of 0.1 mbar|hPa.
(You don't need to specify the unit of measurement, as 1 mbar is equal to 1 hPa.)
.TP
.BR \-c ", " \-\-wind\-direction =\fIDEGREES\fP
The direction in which the wind is blowing, as measured in degrees relative to north, from 0 to 360 degrees.
If you specify a value outside of this range, it will be reduced (that is, a report of 361 degrees would be submitted as 1 degree).
.TP
.BR \-F ", " \-\-water\-level\-above\-stage =\fIFEET\fP
(APRS 1.2)
The water level above or below the flood stage or mean tide.
You may report numbers from \-99.9 feet to 99.9 feet, with a resolution of 0.1 feet.
.TP
.BR \-g ", " \-\-gust =\fISPEED\fP
The peak wind speed measured in the past five minutes.
You may report speeds up to 999 miles per hour.
.TP
.BR \-h ", " \-\-humidity =\fIPERCENTAGE\fP
The humidity relative to temperature.
You may report whole numbers from 1% to 100%.
(APRS does not permit reports of 0%, so those will be rounded up to 1%.)
.TP
.BR \-L ", " \-\-luminosity =\fIWATTS_PER_SQUARE_METER\fP
The current light measurement.
You may report whole numbers up to 1,999 watts per square meter.
.TP
.BR \-p ", " \-\-rainfall\-last\-24\-hours =\fIINCHES\fP
How much rainfall was measured within the last twenty-four hours.
You may report totals of up to 9.99 inches, with a resolution of one one-hundredth of an inch.
.TP
.BR \-P ", " \-\-rainfall\-since\-midnight =\fIINCHES\fP
How much rainfall was measured since 12:00 AM local time.
You may report totals of up to 9.99 inches, with a resolution of one one-hundredth of an inch.
.TP
.BR \-r ", " \-\-rainfall\-last\-hour =\fIINCHES\fP
How much rainfall was measured in the last hour.
You may report values of up to 9.99 inches, with a resolution of one one-hundredth of an inch.
.TP
.BR \-s ", " \-\-snowfall\-last\-24\-hours =\fIINCHES\fP
How much snowfall was measured in the last twenty-four hours.
You may report values of up to 999 inches.
If you are reporting less than ten inches of snow, the resolution increases to one-tenth of an inch.
.TP
.BR \-S ", " \-\-wind\-speed =\fISPEED\fP
The sustained one-minute wind speed.
You may report speeds up to 999 miles per hour.
.TP
.BR \-t ", " \-\-temperature =\fIDEGREES_F\fP
The current temperature.
You may report temperatures between \-99 and 999 degrees Fahrenheit.
.TP
.BR \-T ", " \-\-temperature\-celsius =\fIDEGREES_C\fP
The current temperature.
You may report temperatures between approximately \-72 and 537 degrees Celsius, as your input must be converted to degrees Fahrenheit to be reported.
If both \fB-t\fP and \fB-T\fP are specified, the last option specified will be reported.
.TP
.BR \-V ", " \-\-voltage =\fIVOLTS\fP
(APRS 1.2)
The battery voltage.
You may report voltages of up to 99.9 volts, with a resolution of one-tenth of a volt.
.TP
.BR \-X ", " \-\-radiation =\fINANOSIEVERTS\fP
(APRS 1.2)
The current level of nuclear radiation.
You may report readings of up to 99,000,000,000 nanosieverts per hour, though the resolution of the value put into your report varies based on orders of magnitude.
Consult the APRS 1.2 specification for full details.
.SH EXAMPLES
.PP
If you were operating the ARRL's (theoretical) weather station at their headquarters and wanted to submit a temperature of 68 degrees Fahrenheit, no rainfall, and a westerly wind at about five miles per hour, use this command:
.nf
.RS
.B aprs\-weather\-submit \-k W1AW-13 \-n 41.714692 \-e -72.728514 \-I example-igate-server.foo \-o 12345 \-u hiram \-d percymaxim \-t 68 \-p 0 \-S 5 \-c 270
.RE
.fi
.PP
If you wanted to print an APRS packet showing the current barometric pressure of 990.1 mbar and a temperature of -1 degree Fahrenheit:
.nf
.RS
.B aprs\-weather\-submit \-k W1AW-13 \-n 41.714692 \-e -72.728514 \-b 990.1 \-t \-1 \-A 240
W1AW-13>APRS,TCPIP*:@090251z4142.88N/07243.71W_.../...t-01b09901/A=000240Xaprs-weather-submit/1.5
.RE
.fi
.PP
You could pipe the packet to another command, for example, one that would output it via a sound card into your radio:
.nf
.RS
.B aprs\-weather\-submit \-k W1AW-13 \-n 41.714692 \-e -72.728514 \-b 990.1 \-t \-1 \: | ./hypothetical\-send\-to\-radio\-app
.RE
.fi

.SH EXIT STATUS
.PP
.B EXIT_SUCCESS
If all inputs were correct and within the range,
all mandatory options were included,
and if \fIboth\fP the user specified APRS-IS IGate server information \fIand\fP the packet was submitted successfully,
then return \fBEXIT_SUCCESS\fP (0).
.PP
.B EXIT_FAILURE
Return \fBEXIT_FAILURE\fP (1) if something went wrong, including but not limited to:
bad parameters,
missing callsign,
missing position data,
weather measurements out of range,
failure to authenticate with the APRS-IS server,
failure to connect to the APRS-IS server,
or some other unexpected failure.
.SH BUGS AND ERRATA
.PP
This app does not allow submitting WinAPRS-style positionless weather reports as defined in APRS 1.0.
However, APRS 1.2.1 says that the raw and positionless formats are "strongly discouraged for use."
There are no plans to implement this deprecated functionality.
.PP
If this app was compiled with \fB--without-aprs-is\fR to remove all APRS-IS functionality, then the \fB--server\fR, \fB--port\fR, \fB--username\fR, and \fB--password\fR switches will be unavailable.  On top of that, using them will throw an error.  This is to be expected.
.PP
You cannot connect to an APRS-IS IGate that does \fInot\fP require authentication.
The developer assumed that all APRS-IS servers would want to authenticate people sending in data to be published to the entire world.
This will be fixed in a future release.
.PP
APRS-IS usernames and passwords, as well as your packet, are sent over the Internet in cleartext.
This app does not use TLS to secure the data in transit, nor is the developer aware of such a protocol.
(If secure APRS-IS exists, please let me know and I'll code it!)
.PP
Uncompressed positions were made the default option again as of version 1.4.  For backwards compatibility with older versions of this app, the undocumented \fB-0\fR and \fB--uncompressed-position\fR switches are still accepted (but they do nothing).

.SH NOTES
Some older apps and devices may unintentionally display the new APRS 1.2 measurements (radiation, water level, and voltage) as a comment rather than a measurement.
This is compliant with the APRS specification and not a bug in this app.

.SH STANDARDS CONFORMING TO
aprs-weather-submit compiles with APRS version 1.2.1, as documented in the following:
.TP
.UR http://\:www.aprs.org/\:doc/\:APRS101.PDF
"APRS Protocol Reference: Protocol Version 1.0" (29 Aug 2000)
.UE
.TP
"APRS Version 1.1 Errata" (3 Nov 2011)
.TP
.UR http://\:www.aprs.org/\:aprs11\:spec-wx.txt
"APRS Weather Specification Comments" (24 Mar 2011)
.UE
.TP
.UR http://\:www.aprs.org/\:aprs12/\:weather-new.txt
APRS Version 1.2.1, "Weather Updates to the Spec" (24 Mar 2011)
.UE

.SH AUTHOR AND COPYRIGHT
.BR aprs\-weather\-submit ", version 1.5"
.br
Copyright (c) 2019-2022 Colin Cogle.
.br
This program comes with ABSOLUTELY NO WARRANTY.
This is free software, and you are welcome to redistribute it under certain conditions.
See the
.UR https://\:www.gnu.org/\:licenses/
GNU General Public License (version\ 3.0)
.UE
for more details.
.PP
Bug reports and contributions should be made on this project's GitHub page:
.UR https://\:github.com/\:rhymeswithmogul/\:aprs-weather-submit
.I https://\:github.com/\:rhymeswithmogul/\:aprs-weather-submit
.UE
.PP
QRT. 73 de KC1HBK
